#summary Finding your way around a Wheels application.
#labels chapter,0.9.4,published_dev

After downloading and unzipping Wheels, here's the directory structure that you will see (plus signs indicate folders):

 * + config
 * + controllers
 * + events
 * + files
 * + images
 * + javascripts
 * + lib
 * + miscellaneous
 * + models
 * + plugins
 * + stylesheets
 * + views
 * + wheels
 * .htaccess
 * Application.cfc
 * index.cfm
 * !IsapiRewrite4.ini
 * rewrite.cfm
 * root.cfm

==Quick Summary==

Your configuration settings will be done in the `config` directory.

Your application code will end up in four of the folders, namely `controllers`, `events`, `models`, and `views`.

Static media files should be placed in the `files`, `images`, `javascripts` and `stylesheets` folders.

Place stand-alone (non framework) CFC libraries in the `lib` folder. CFCs that need to be accessed remotely via <cfajaxproxy> and Flash AMF binding should be placed in the `miscellaneous` folder.

Place Wheels plugins in the `plugins` folder.

And the last directory? That's the framework itself. It exists in the `wheels` directory. Please go in there and have a look around. If you find anything you can improve or new features that you want to add, let us know!

==Detailed Overview==

Let's go through all of the files and directories now starting with the ones you'll spend most of your time in: the code directories.

===`controllers`===

This is where you create your controllers. You'll see one file in here already: `Controller.cfc`. You can place functions inside `Controller.cfc` to have that function shared between all the controllers you create. (This works because all your controllers will extend `Controller`.)

===`models`===

This is where you create your model files (or classes if you prefer that term). Each model file you create should map to one table in the database.

The setup in this directory is similar to the one for controllers, to share methods you can place them in the existing `Model.cfc` file.

===`views`===

This is where you prepare the views for your users. As you work on your website, you will create one view directory for each controller.

===`events`===

If you want code executed when !ColdFusion triggers an event, you can place it here (rather than directly in `Application.cfc`).

===`config`===

Make all your configuration changes here. You can set the environment, routes, and other settings here. You can also override settings by making changes in the individual settings files that you see in the subdirectories.

===`files`===

Any files that you intend to deliver to the user using the [sendFile sendFile()] function should be placed here. Even if you don't use that function to deliver files, this folder can still serve as file storage if you like.

===`images`===

This is a good place to put your images. It's not required to have them here, but all Wheels functions that involve images will, by convention, assume they are stored here.

===`javascripts`===

This is a good place to put your JavaScript files. 

===`stylesheets`===

This is a good place to put your CSS files.

===`lib`===

Store CFC libraries in this folder for use with <cfobject> and `CreateObject()`. This is the best place to store "utility" libraries that you'd like to deploy across multiple Wheels applications. And it's a great place to store CFCs that you download from [http://www.riaforge.org/ RIAForge], [http://www.cflib.org/ CFLib], and other CFML developers.

===`miscellaneous `===

Use this folder for code that you need to run completely outside of the framework. (There is an empty `Application.cfc` file in here, which will prevent Wheels from taking part in the execution.)

This is most useful if you're using Flash to connect directly to a CFC via AMF binding or if you're using <cfajaxproxy> in your views to bind directly to a CFC as well.

===`plugins`===

Place any plugins you have downloaded and want installed here.

===`wheels`===

This is the framework itself. When a new version of Wheels is released it is often enough to just drop it in here (unless there has been changes to the general folder structure).

===`.htaccess`===

This file is used by Apache, and you specifically need it for URL rewriting to work properly. If you're not using Apache, then you can safely delete it.

===`IsapiRewrite4.ini`===

If you use IIS and want to use URL rewriting, you'll need this file. Otherwise, you can safely delete it.

===`Application.cfc`, `index.cfm`, `rewrite.cfm` and `root.cfm`===

These are all needed for the framework to run. No changes should be done to these files.

You can add more directories if you want to, of course. Just remember to include a blank `Application.cfc` in those directories. Otherwise, Wheels will try to get itself involved with those requests as well.