#summary How to setup and run the unit tests for the Wheels framework itself.
#labels chapter,1.0,draft

==Running the Unit Tests for Wheels itself==

Just like writing and running unit tests for your own Wheels application, Wheels itself has an ever growing test suite that we use to make sure things don't break as we're fixing and adding things to Wheels itself. Whether you're contributing code, upgrading to a new version of Wheels or moving Wheels from one CFML platform to another; it's a good idea to run the unit tests for Wheels and report any failures back to one of the members of the core team or to our [http://groups.google.com/group/cfwheels Google Group].

Before you run the unit tests for Wheels, you'll need to setup the test database that we use to test the model portion of Wheels. The test database is called *wheelstestdb* and we provide a script for creating and populating the database in the wheesltestdb.sql file located at: 

*wheels/tests/wheelstestdb.sql*

<font color="red">*NOTE:*</font> At this time the wheelstestdb.sql is written exclusively for [http://www.microsoft.com/Sqlserver/2005/en/us/express.aspx Microsoft SQL Server 2005] or [http://www.microsoft.com/Sqlserver/2008/en/us/express.aspx 2008]. If you would like to port the script to another Wheels' supported database platform (such as Oracle or MySQL), feel free to do so and we thank you in advanced for your contribution.

The first thing to do is to create a database called *wheelstestdb* in SQL Server and run the *wheelstestdb.sql* script against it. At this point the database should be created and populated with a couple of tables and some test data.

Now that the database is created, you'll need to create a DSN for the database from within your ColdFusion Administrator.

Once the database is setup, it's now time to run the tests! Open up the Wheels' Congratulations page in your browser and scroll down the Wheels debug area at the bottom of the page. Next the framework version there is a link labeled "Run Tests", click it and the entire suite of unit tests for Wheels will be ran. It could take a little bit for the entire suite to run so be patient.

For information on running and writing tests, check out our [TestingFramework Creating and Running Tests] chapter.